In part 1 of this series we made a swing for Marty and timed how long it took for him to complete a cycle. It's probably not surprising (based on the title of the series) that my plan is for Marty to keep the swing going on his own by kicking at the appropriate times. There are a few challenges to doing this and one of them is for Marty to know well-enough where he is in his swinging motion to allow him to time the kicks.

In part 1 we used Marty's accelerometer data to discover the period of a swing and showed that there was a time lag in the availability of this information. We also mentioned that when Marty starts to swing there data from the accelerometer isn't a smooth curve as it is also measuring any wobble that we introduced when we pushed Marty to get the swing going.

One problem we're going to have when we start kicking is that there will be more wobbles and the accelerometer data won't be very smooth so we're going to have to deal with that problem by "filtering" the accelerometer data before we use it.

As it happens that's the part of this project that I was going to blog about next and I'd made some progress on it but hadn't gotten all the experimental data together before we headed away on holiday. So I've changed tack a little and will discuss filtering in part 3. Meanwhile (while taking a break from very hot weather during the day) I have been working on modelling Marty's swing and building a machine-learning algorithm to learn the best way to make the model-Marty keep swinging.
<h2>Modelling Marty on a Swing</h2>
The pendulum model at the start of part 1 relies on knowledge of the oscillatory way a pendulum swings. When the angle of swing is very small the motion follows a sine curve and this will be discussed further in part 3. But to model the impact of kicking we need to understand the physics of pumping a playground swing a bit more directly.

A very good way to understand what is happening with a swing is to consider the energy of the "closed-system". In this case "system" refers to Marty, the rod and strings he's suspended from and the air around him as he moves. It isn't really a "closed-system" as air is free to move around and be replaced by the surrounding air but it is sufficiently good for us to model the swing to a reasonable degree. The total energy in a closed-system remains constant as energy cannot be created or destroyed.

The kinds of energy present in a Marty-swing are:

kinetic energy - the energy of Marty's motion

potential energy - when Marty swings high he has more potential energy as he is further "up" in the earth's gravitational field

thermal and other energy - as Marty swings through the air energy is transferred to air molecules

&nbsp;